Add real-time Ubuntu Core docs (#45)
canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs: docs/how-to/uc-image-creation.rst

For example:

.. code-block:: yaml

    kernel-cmdline:
        append:
            - nohz=on
            - nohz_full=2-N
            - irqaffinity=0-1

Refer to :doc:`../reference/kernel-boot-parameters` for the list of supported parameters.

Modify ``snapcraft.yaml`` to fit your application.
At least, make sure to change the name and version to something distinct, for example, to ``realtime-pc`` and ``example`` respectively.

Now, build the gadget snap:

.. code-block:: console

    $ snapcraft --verbose
    ...
    Created snap package realtime-pc_example_amd64.snap

.. tip::
    You need to rebuild the snap every time you change the `snapcraft.yaml` file.

Create the model assertion
--------------------------

The model assertion is a digitally signed document that describes the content of the Ubuntu Core image.
Read the `model assertion`_ documentation before continuing.

Below is an example model assertion in YAML, describing a `core22` Ubuntu Core
image:

.. literalinclude :: uc-image-creation/model.json
   :language: json

Create the model assertion inside the project directory.

Set the following:

- ``authority-id``, ``brand-id`` to your developer ID

> - ``timestamp`` to a RFC3339 formatted string, within you signing key's validity

Reviewer: The timestamp need a value post creation date of the snap key right?

Author: I believe the timestamp should be within the signing key's validity. The key is a PGP key-pair which can be generated with `snap create-key`, `snapcraft create-key`, or another program. PGP keys can have creation and expiry dates but the one `snap create-key` generates doesn't have the right date, so I'm not sure what date is enforced, maybe it has to do with the registration date into the snap store. Need to check.

Author: Details of the public key generated for this how-to:
```
gpg  --homedir /home/farshid/.snap/gnupg/ --export -a realtime-ubuntu | gpg --list-packets
# off=0 ctb=99 tag=6 hlen=3 plen=525
:public key packet:
        version 4, algo 1, created 1451606400, expires 0
        pkey[0]: [4096 bits]
        pkey[1]: [17 bits]
        keyid: A8C4F62D7912B49E
# off=528 ctb=b4 tag=13 hlen=2 plen=15
:user ID packet: "realtime-ubuntu"
# off=545 ctb=89 tag=2 hlen=3 plen=575
:signature packet: algo 1, keyid A8C4F62D7912B49E
        version 4, created 1451606400, md5len 0, sigclass 0x13
        digest algo 10, begin of digest 61 51
        hashed subpkt 33 len 21 (issuer fpr v4 5D2F0F60249592D1A49CB80BA8C4F62D7912B49E)
        hashed subpkt 2 len 4 (sig created 2016-01-01)
        hashed subpkt 27 len 1 (key flags: 2F)
        hashed subpkt 21 len 1 (pref-hash-algos: 10)
        hashed subpkt 30 len 1 (features: 01)
        hashed subpkt 23 len 1 (keyserver preferences: 80)
        subpkt 16 len 8 (issuer key ID A8C4F62D7912B49E)
        data: [4096 bits]
```

Reviewer 2: The timestamp must be after the registration date of the key.

2) Sign the model assertion

.. code-block:: shell

    snap sign -k realtime-ubuntu model.json > model.signed.yaml

The ``snap sign`` command takes JSON as input and produces YAML as output!

.. tip::

    You need to repeat the signing every time you change the input model, because the signature is calculated based on the model.

Before we continue, let's have an overview of the files inside our project directory:

.. code-block:: console

    $ tree -L 1
    .
    ├── model.json
    ├── model.signed.yaml
    └── pc-gadget

    2 directories, 2 files

The project directory should contain the model assertion, the signed model assertion, and pc-gadget directory.

Build the Ubuntu Core image
---------------------------

First, get familiar with the tooling by referring to the guide on `building Ubuntu Core images`_.

We use ``ubuntu-image`` and need to set the paths to the following as input:

- Exported store credentials
- Signed model assertion YAML file
- Locally built gadget snap

Export the store credentials to a file:

.. code-block:: shell

    snapcraft export-login credentials.txt

Then build the image:

.. code-block:: console

>     $ UBUNTU_STORE_AUTH_DATA_FILENAME=credentials.txt \

Reviewer: Why is this necessary? is it specific to real time?
The UC doc about creating your custom image doesn't seem to mention that.

Author: This is because the realtime-kernel snap is a commercial snap, available via dedicated snap stores only.

How to create a real-time Ubuntu Core image
===========================================

> .. note::

Reviewer 3: Hey @farshidtz , I see this might be a snippet that would be reused quite a bit.

We can add a file under `<repo>/docs/reuse`, e.g. `snippets.txt`.

And then add snippets like this (in RST or MD syntax) and reference it using the `include` directive.
https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-docs-starter-pack/blob/main/doc-cheat-sheet.rst?plain=1#L207

Author: I plan to do some refactoring (merging the uc and classic config instructions) and then this exact note will no longer be repeated.

    This guide assumes access to features available exclusively to `dedicated Snap Store`_ users.

Canonical builds and publishes Ubuntu Core images for a range of `supported platforms`_.
However, these images include the generic Linux kernel. 
In order to run Ubuntu Core with the real-time kernel, we need to build it ourselves. 

This guide shows how to build an Ubuntu Core image with the real-time kernel.

> We start by showing how to :ref:`build a vanilla image <ubuntu-core-image>` which is excellent for testing and tuning, and then illustrate how to :ref:`make a custom image <custom-ubuntu-core-image>` with production-ready kernel configurations.

Reviewer 3: Nitpick on the language here to be a bit more direct since this is a how-to.

```suggestion
We will first need to :ref:`build a vanilla image <ubuntu-core-image>` - which is excellent for testing and tuning - and proceed to :ref:`make a custom image <custom-ubuntu-core-image>` with production-ready kernel configurations.
```

.. _ubuntu-core-image:

Create an image with the real-time kernel
-----------------------------------------

To do this we need to describe the image content and then use a tool to build it.

.. _model-assertion:

Create the model assertion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The model assertion is a digitally signed document that describes the content of the Ubuntu Core image.
Read the `model assertion`_ documentation before continuing.

Below is an example model assertion in YAML, describing a `core22` Ubuntu Core
image:

> .. literalinclude :: uc-image-creation/model.json

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. literalinclude:: uc-image-creation/model.json
   :language: json
   :emphasize-lines: 8, 9, 20
```

Can use the emphasize-lines option to emphasize the lines that require changes.
Nitpick.

   :language: json

Inside an empty directory, create a file named ``model.json`` with the above content.

Change the following:

- ``authority-id``, ``brand-id`` to your developer ID, since this is custom model. Use ``snapcraft whoami`` command to get your developer ID.
- ``timestamp`` to an RFC3339 formatted string that falls within the validity period of your signing key. Use ``date -Iseconds --utc`` command to generate the current time.
- ``store`` to your dedicated Snap Store ID.
- ``model`` to a name that accurately represents your device(s).

> The ``snaps`` array is a list of snaps that get included in the image.

Reviewer 3: Hi @farshidtz , I would suggest rephrase this slightly to bring focus to the real-time kernel and let the upstream UC docs do the rest of the explanation as needed.

```
The ``realtime-kernel`` snap must be defined in the `snaps array`_ for the
real-time kernel to be included in the image. You can add other required snaps
(e.g. snaps for your real-time applications) to this list.

.. _snaps array: https://ubuntu.com/core/docs/create-model-assertion#heading--edit-model-3
```

But please feel free to leave as is if you disagree.
Thanks.

Author: I'd leave this as it is for the following reasons:
- The reader isn't expected to change anything here as the yaml already has the realtime-kernel snap listed.
- The realtime-kernel snap may contain more than just the kernel such as hardcoded RT configurations.

In that list, the ``realtime-kernel`` snap contains the realtime Linux kernel.
Here you can add any other snaps, including for example your real-time applications.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sign the model assertion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Next, we need to sign the model assertion.
Refer to the guide on `signing model assertion`_ for details on how to sign the model assertion. 

> Here are the needed steps:

Author: The document's flow breaks without this. I've removed the linebreak above it for clarity, as this actually belongs to the previous paragraph.

> 1) Create and register a key

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create and register a key
```

> Use ``snapcraft list-keys`` to check your existing keys.

Reviewer 3: Suggest indenting and nesting everything under the relevant steps.

Author: The rendering makes this look like quotations:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d17eeaa1-4649-420a-bdf4-0e4531bf7cfb)

Is this what you expect?

Reviewer 3: hi @farshidtz , it shouldn't!

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8efd06c4-654f-4ea7-bd54-09cdabeb3dfe)

```
1. Create and register a key

   Use ``snapcraft list-keys`` to check your existing keys.
   If you don't already have a key, create one locally and register it with your account.
   Choose a meaningful name for the key, as it can be used to sign multiple models.
   In this guide we use ``rtu-model`` to sign all our real-time Ubuntu models.

   .. code-block:: shell

      snapcraft create-key rtu-model
      snapcraft register-key rtu-model

   Remember to update the model assertion's ``timestamp``, if you created a new key and plan to use it next.

#. Sign the model assertion

   .. code-block:: shell

      snap sign -k rtu-model model.json > model.signed.yaml

   The ``snap sign`` command takes JSON as input and produces YAML as output!

   .. tip::

      You need to repeat the signing every time you change the input model, because the signature is calculated based on the model.

```

If you don't already have a key, create one locally and register it with your account.
Choose a meaningful name for the key, as it can be used to sign multiple models.
In this guide we use ``rtu-model`` to sign all our real-time Ubuntu models.

.. code-block:: shell

    snapcraft create-key rtu-model

>     snapcraft register-key rtu-model

Reviewer 2: We might want to leave a tip or a note about [role-scoping keys](https://ubuntu.com/core/services/guide/signing-keys).

Author: I prefer to leave this as it is for now, given the points mentioned in https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/45#pullrequestreview-2256359246 and to avoid referencing an orphaned documentation set which is subject to change. I could leave a comment or create an issue to mention this and add a reference later, once there is one.

Remember to update the model assertion's ``timestamp``, if you created a new key and plan to use it next.

> 2) Sign the model assertion

Reviewer 3: Same as previous bullet point.

.. code-block:: shell

    snap sign -k rtu-model model.json > model.signed.yaml

> The ``snap sign`` command takes JSON as input and produces YAML as output!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``snap sign`` command takes JSON as input and produces YAML as output.
```

Sorry, is there a reason for ending the sentence with an exclamation point?

Author: This was because the tool taken a JSON, signs it and outputs YAML, which is unexpected. The conversion itself is surprising and YAML is actually a less portable serialization format, so I don't know why this is done.

Reviewer 3: Ah ok. But i think even then we can stick with a "." instead of "!" in a how-to guide.

.. tip::

    You need to repeat the signing every time you change the input model, because the signature is calculated based on the model.

Build the image
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, get familiar with the tooling by referring to the guide on `building Ubuntu Core images`_.

We use ``ubuntu-image`` and need to set the paths to the following as input:

- Exported store credentials
- Signed model assertion YAML file

Export the store credentials to a file:

.. code-block:: shell

>     snapcraft export-login credentials.txt

Reviewer 2: Might be worth mentioning that the credentials can be for any user so long as they have the Viewer role in the store specified in the model assertion.

Reviewer 3: Is there an upstream doc in the Core or Snapcraft docs set that describes this? I can't seem to find it.
It would be cleaner to link to the relevant docs instead of explaining the permissions here.

Related question. If the user only has Viewer role, what happens when the run the `snapcraft export-login` command?

✅ The image file is now ready. Refer to Ubuntu Core guide on `flashing the image to a storage medium`_.

----

After installing this image on your device, you can continue by tuning your system for real-time processing. 
The :doc:`../how-to/uc-boot-parameters` guide describes the method for dynamically configuring the kernel command line parameters.
The configuration is an iterative process that is best done together with the expected workload.

Once satisfied with the configurations, continue below to learn how those configurations can be set statically during the image build.

.. _custom-ubuntu-core-image:

Create a custom real-time Ubuntu Core image
-------------------------------------------

This section shows how to statically set the desired Kernel command-line parameters for the Ubuntu Core system.
To do this, we need to create a custom gadget snap, create a model assertion, and then build the OS image.

.. admonition:: Project directory

    Start in an empty directory.
    We refer to this in different parts of the document as our *project directory*.

Create the gadget snap

> ----------------------

Reviewer 3: I think the headings from this point onward should be one level below the "Create a custom real-time Ubuntu Core image" heading.

> The `gadget snap`_ documentation is a recommended read before starting.

Reviewer 3: Hey @farshidtz , a general comment.

The how-to can omit explanation which is not focused on RTU itself.
https://diataxis.fr/how-to-guides/#key-principles

Also it can be a lot more "you" and not "our" since this isn't a tutorial.
https://diataxis.fr/how-to-guides/#the-language-of-how-to-guides

Author: Thanks for the info. I've tried to avoid explanations that are **readily available** from the upstream docs.

This is best done by forking an existing reference gadget, then changing it for our purpose.
For example, there is the `pc gadget`_ which is suitable for most AMD64 platforms, and the `pi gadget`_ which is meant for Raspberry Pis.

> Let's create a custom gadget snap based on the core22 pc gadget.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section uses the core22 pc gadget snap as an example for creating a custom gadget snap.
```

This part reads a bit too 'tutorial-ish' for me, hence the suggestion.

Inside the project directory, clone the specific branch and enter the repository:

.. code-block:: shell

    git clone https://github.com/snapcore/pc-gadget.git --branch=22 --depth=1
    cd pc-gadget

> 

Reviewer 3: Extra line?

Add the desired kernel command line in an array to ``kernel-cmdline.append`` in ``gadget/gadget-amd64.yaml``.
For example:

.. code-block:: yaml

    kernel-cmdline:
        append:
            - nohz=on
            - nohz_full=2-N
            - irqaffinity=0-1

Refer to :doc:`../reference/kernel-boot-parameters` for the list of supported parameters.

Modify ``snapcraft.yaml`` to fit your application.

> At least, make sure to change the name and version to something distinct, for example, to ``realtime-pc`` and ``example`` respectively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At minimum, change the name and version to something distinct, for example, to ``realtime-pc`` and ``example`` respectively.
```

Now, build the gadget snap:

.. code-block:: console

    $ snapcraft --verbose
    ...
    Created snap package realtime-pc_example_amd64.snap

.. tip::
    You need to rebuild the snap every time you change the `snapcraft.yaml` file.

> Create the model assertion

Reviewer 3: Same comment about heading level.

--------------------------

Create the model assertion inside the project directory.
Follow the same steps in :ref:`model-assertion` section but replace the ``pc`` snap entry with the following:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "name": "realtime-pc",
        "type": "gadget"
    },

> Unlike the original ``pc`` snap definition, this entry has no listed ``channel`` and ``id``, because it isn't in a Store.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unlike the original ``pc`` snap definition, this entry has no listed ``channel`` and ``id``, because it isn't published in a Store.
```

> We have built it locally in the earlier steps and will later on pass it directly to the image builder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The locally built gadget snap will be passed directly to the image builder.
```

> In practice, the gadget snap should be uploaded to a Store and then listed in the model assertion along with its channel and id.

Reviewer 3: Could we use something else besides "in practice" since the rest of this sounds like a best practice recommendation? E.g. "For production use, the gadget snap should be uploaded..."

Uploading to the store makes it possible to use a signed snap that receives updates.

> Sign the model assertion which has our custom ``realtime-pc`` gadget, using the same key which we created in the previous section of this guide:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sign the model assertion which has our custom ``realtime-pc`` gadget, using the same key which was created in the previous section of this guide:
```

    Fetching realtime-kernel (134)
    Fetching core22 (1380)
    WARNING: "realtime-pc" installed from local snaps disconnected from a store cannot be refreshed subsequently!
    Copying "pc-gadget/realtime-pc_example_amd64.snap" (realtime-pc)
    [1] load_gadget_yaml
    [2] set_artifact_names
    [3] populate_rootfs_contents
    [4] generate_disk_info
    [5] calculate_rootfs_size
    [6] populate_bootfs_contents
    [7] populate_prepare_partitions
    [8] make_disk
    [9] generate_snap_manifest
    Build successful

This adds all the snaps specified in the model assertion and builds an image file called ``pc.img``.
There is a warning for ``realtime-pc`` gadget snap because this is being side-loaded, rather than fetched from the store.

✅ The image file with the custom configurations is ready! Refer to Ubuntu Core guide on `flashing the image to a storage medium`_.

After installing and running a device with this image, the kernel parameters can be verified by looking into ``/proc/cmdline``:

.. code-block:: console

    $ cat /proc/cmdline
    snapd_recovery_mode=run console=ttyS0,115200n8 console=tty1 panic=-1 nohz=on nohz_full=2-N irqaffinity=0-1

----

> This guide provided a very basic setup to configure Ubuntu Core for real-time processing and create a bootable OS image for it. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This guide provides a very basic setup to configure Ubuntu Core for real-time processing and create a bootable OS image for it. 
```

How to create a Real-time Ubuntu Core image
===========================================

.. note::

    This guide assumes access to features available exclusively to `dedicated Snap Store`_ users.

Canonical builds and publishes Ubuntu Core images for a range of `supported platforms`_.

> However, these images include the generic Linux kernel. 

Reviewer 4: I would say "Ubuntu kernel" instead of "LInux kernel". We also published optimised Ubuntu Core images for supported platforms. I suggest rephrasing this to read: "Canonical builds and publishes generic and silicon-optimised Ubuntu Core images for a range of supported platforms. The generic Ubuntu Core images include the generic Ubuntu kernel by default. In order [...]"

Author: We've referred to the kernel as Linux kernel and realtime kernel across the documentation. Changing it in one place will add confusion. I've addressed the rest in https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/45/commits/f2983be06138d9c9f8d2835d321581a29429e3b5

Author: Changed to [Ubuntu kernel](https://ubuntu.com/kernel): https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/45/commits/9f3351bde8c653ba3d61768e007906bb0d64423e

    [0] prepare_image
    Fetching snapd (21759)
    Fetching realtime-kernel (149)
    Fetching core22 (1586)
    Fetching pc (146)
    [1] load_gadget_yaml
    [2] set_artifact_names
    [3] populate_rootfs_contents
    [4] generate_disk_info
    [5] calculate_rootfs_size
    [6] populate_bootfs_contents
    [7] populate_prepare_partitions
    [8] make_disk
    [9] generate_snap_manifest
    Build successful

This downloads all the snaps specified in the model assertion and builds an image file called ``pc.img``.

.. hint::

    To fetch the ``realtime-kernel`` snap for this image build, it should be included explicitly in your dedicated Snap Store.

.. code-block:: console

    $ file pc.img 
    pc.img: DOS/MBR boot sector; partition 1 : ID=0xee, start-CHS (0x0,0,0), end-CHS (0x0,0,0), startsector 1, 6195199 sectors, extended partition table (last)

✅ The image file is now ready. Refer to Ubuntu Core guide on `flashing the image to a storage medium`_.

----

After installing this image on your device, you can continue by tuning your system for real-time processing. 

> The :ref:`ubuntu-core` guide describes the method for dynamically configuring the kernel command line parameters.

Reviewer 3: hi @farshidtz , this target doesn't exist.
I think this was where you wanted to link to?
:ref:`ubuntu-core-kernel-cmdline`
